14 NOVEMBER YEAR OF THE DEPEND ADULT 
UNDERGARMENT 


P. T. Krause: N. Cambridge: that infamous deceptive post-seizure feeling of well-being. 
That broken-fever, reversal-of-fortune-type highhearted feeling after a neuroelectric 
event. Poor Tony Krause awoke in the ambulance lizardless and continent and feeling 
right as rain. Lay there and flirted with the blue-jawed paramedic leaning over him, 
certain bawdy entendres on expressions like vital signs and dilation until the paramedic 



radioed ahead to Cambridge City's E. Room to cancel the crash-cart. Manipulated his 
skinny arms in a parodic Minimal Mambo, lying there. Fiddle-de-dee'd the paramedic's 
warning that post-seizure feelings of well-being were notoriously deceptive and 
transient. 

And then also the little-mentioned advantage to being destitute and in possession of a 
Health Card that's expired and not even in your name: hospitals show you a kind of 
inverted respect; a place like Cambridge City Hospital bows to your will not to stay; they 
all of a sudden defer to your subjective diagnostic knowledge of your own condition, 
which post-seizure condition you feel has turned the corner toward improvement: they 
bow to your quixotic will: it's unfortunately not a free hospital but it is a free country: 
they honor your wishes and compliment your mambo and say Go with God. 

It's a good thing you can't see what you look like, though. 

And the serendipity of Cambridge City Hospital being just an eight-block stroll east on 
Cambridge St. and then south on Prospect, through mentholated autumn air, through 
Inman Square and up to Antitoi Entertainment, maybe the one last place where a 
renewed, post-seizure, on-the-diagnostic-upswing if still slightly shaky young gender- 
dysphoric might yet expect a bit of kindness, pharmacological credit, since the affairs of 
Wo and Copley Library and heart. 

The big brick cake of the hospital behind Krause in purple twilight. The brisk click of his 
heels on pavement, boa semi-formally loose on his shoulders and down beneath each 
arm, hand holding red leather collar closed at the throat, head up and staying that way 
on its own, steady eyes meeting with blase dignity the eyes of whoever passes. The 
dignity of a man risen by will from the ashes of Withdrawal and now on the upswing and 
with places to go and potentially considerate Canadians to see. A charming and 
potentially once again in the not-too-distant future gorgeous creature with the renewed 
wherewithal to now meet the eyes of Inman Sq. pedestrians veering sharply away from 
the residual smells of men's room stall and subway vomit, the ashes from which he's 
been rescued and risen once again, feeling righter than rain. A rind of moon hanging 
cocked above a four-spired church. And the emergent stars are yo-yos, you feel, after a 
seizure: Poor Tony feels as if he could cast them out, draw them in again at will. 

The way Poor Tony Krause, Lolasister, and Susan T. Cheese became mercenary 
adjuncts to something dour Bertraund Antitoi had invited them to call the "Front- 
Contre-O.N.A.N.isme"'\Nas that, for a heavily cut bundle to split six ways, Lolasister, 
Susan T. Cheese, P. T. Krause, Bridget Tenderhole, Equus Reese, and the late Stokely 
('Dark Star') McNair had had to wear identical red leather coats and auburn wigs and 
spike heels and go and hang around the lobby of Harvard Square's Sheraton 
Commander Hotel with six mannish-looking women in the same wigs and coats while an 
androgynous Quebecer insurgent who filled out h/his red leather coat in a way that 
made Bridget Tenderhole dig his nails into his palms in sheer green envy came through 
the Commander's revolving Lucite doors and strode purposefully into the crowded 
Epaulet Ballroom and threw foul semi-liquid violet waste from a souvenir miniature 
waste-displacement barrel in the face of the Canadian Minister of Inter-O.N.A.N. Trade, 
who was addressing the U.S. press from a leaf-shaped rostrum. The decoys were then 
required to mill hysterically in the lobby, all twelve of them, and then hit the revolving 



doors and disperse in a dozen different vectors as the androgynous waste-wielding 
Quebecer legged it out of the Epaulet Ballroom and lobby pursued by white-suited men 
with earplugs and Cobray M-ll subautomatics, so the security guys'd see identical 
epicene figures high-heeling it away in different directions and get fuddled about who to 
chase. Susan T. Cheese and Poor Tony'd met the Antitoi Bros. — only one of whom 
could or would speak, and who'd been in charge of the diversionary aspects of the 
Sheraton Commander operation, and had clearly been subordinate to still other 
Quebecers of way higher I.Q. — Krause and S.T.C. had met them at Inman Square's 
Ryle's Tavern, which had Gender-Dysphoric Night every second Wednesday, and 
attracted comely and unrough trade, and which Poor Tony passed now (Ryle's), just 
after the Man o' War Grille, now only a block or so from the Antitois' glass-and-novelty- 
shop front, feeling not so much quite ill again as just deeply tired, after only five or so 
blocks — that post-fever, sleep-for-a-week-type cellular fatigue — and is debating with 
himself about whether to have a go at the purses of the two young and unstriking 
women walking just a few steps ahead, both of their purses hanging only by the 
flimsiest of evening-gown-width straps from slumped shoulders, the duo interracial, 
rare and disquieting in metro Boston, the black girl talking a click a minute and the white 
one not responding, her weary stolid plod and air of inattention fairly begging for a 
purse-snatch, both of them with an air about them of routine victimization, the sort of 
demoralized lassitude Poor Tony felt always guaranteed a minimum of protest or 
pursuit — though the white girl wore formidable-looking running shoes under her tartan 
skirt. So intent was Poor Tony Krause on the logistics and implications of the possible 
purses dangled as if by God right before him — how different to hit the Antitois' 
doorstep with liquid assets, to request a transaction rather than bare charity, more 
almost a social call than a contemptible Withdrawn snivel for compassion — so intent as 
he sidestepped an impressive pile of dog-droppings and passed across the broad 
windows of the Man o' War that he never saw his old former crewmate Mad Matty 
Pemulis, a sure source of compassion, looking up and out and down and back up, aghast 
in recognition of what Poor Tony has come through the corridor to resemble. 


Geoffrey Day's noted the way most of the male residents of Ennet House have special 
little cognomens for their genitals. E.g. 'Bruno,' 'Jake,' 'Fang' (Minty), 'The One-Eyed 
Monk,' 'Fritzie,' 'Russell the Love Muscle.' He speculates this could be a class thing: 
neither he nor Ewell nor Ken Erdedy have named their Units. Like Ewell, Day enters a 
certain amount of comparative-class data in his journal. Doony Glynn called his penis 
'Poor Richard'; Chandler Foss confessed to the moniker 'Bam-Bam.' Lenz had referred to 
his own Unit as 'the Frightful Hog.' Day would die before admitting he missed either 
Lenz or his soliloquies about the Hog, which had been frequent. The penis in question 
had been that curious two or three shades darker than the rest of Lenz that people's 
penises sometimes are. Lenz had brandished it at his roommates whenever he wished 
to emphasize a point. It had been short and thick and blunt, and Lenz described the Hog 
as a primo example of what he called the Polish Curse, viz. undistinguished length but 
sobering circumference: 'Easy on the bottom but tears hell out of the sides, brother.' 



This had been his description of the Polish Curse. A surprising amount of Day's Recovery 
Journal is filled with quotations from R. Lenz. Lenz's discharge had moved the tax- 
attorney Tiny Ewell up into the 3-Man room with Day. Ewell was the one man here with 
whom a conversation of anything remotely approaching depth could be held, so Day 
was nonplussed when he found himself, after a couple long nights, almost missing Lenz, 
his obsession with time, his patter, his way of leaning up against the wall upside-down in 
his briefs, or brandishing the Hog. 

And re Ennet House resident Kate Gompert and this depression issue: Some 
psychiatric patients — plus a certain percentage of people who've gotten so dependent 
on chemicals for feelings of well-being that when the chemicals have to be abandoned 
they undergo a loss-trauma that reaches way down deep into the soul's core systems — 
these persons know firsthand that there's more than one kind of so-called 'depression.' 
One kind is low-grade and sometimes gets called anhedonia 280 or simple melancholy. It's 
a kind of spiritual torpor in which one loses the ability to feel pleasure or attachment to 
things formerly important. The avid bowler drops out of his league and stays home at 
night staring dully at kick-boxing cartridges. The gourmand is off his feed. The sensualist 
finds his beloved Unit all of a sudden to be so much feelingless gristle, just hanging 
there. The devoted wife and mother finds the thought of her family about as moving, all 
of a sudden, as a theorem of Euclid. It's a kind of emotional novocaine, this form of 
depression, and while it's not overtly painful its deadness is disconcerting and... well, 
depressing. Kate Gompert's always thought of this anhedonic state as a kind of radical 
abstracting of everything, a hollowing out of stuff that used to have affective content. 
Terms the undepressed toss around and take for granted as full and fleshy — happiness, 
joie de vivre, preference, love — are stripped to their skeletons and reduced to abstract 
ideas. They have, as it were, denotation but not connotation. The anhedonic can still 
speak about happiness and meaning et al, but she has become incapable of feeling 
anything in them, of understanding anything about them, of hoping anything about 
them, or of believing them to exist as anything more than concepts. Everything becomes 
an outline of the thing. Objects become schemata. The world becomes a map of the 
world. An anhedonic can navigate, but has no location. I.e. the anhedonic becomes, in 
the lingo of Boston AA, Unable To Identify. 

It's worth noting that, among younger E.T.A.s, the standard take on Dr. J. 0. 
Incandenza's suicide attributes his putting his head in the microwave to this kind of 
anhedonia. This is maybe because anhedonia's often associated with the crises that 
afflict extremely goal-oriented people who reach a certain age having achieved all or 
more than all than they'd hoped for. The what-does-it-all-mean-type crisis of middle- 
aged Americans. In fact this is in fact not what killed Incandenza at all. In fact the 
presumption that he'd achieved all his goals and found that the achievement didn't 
confer meaning or joy on his existence says more about the students at E.T.A. than it 
says about Orin's and Hal's father: still under the influence of the deLint-like carrot-and- 
stick philosophies of their hometown coaches rather than the more paradoxical 
Schtitt/Incandenza/Lyle school, younger athletes who can't help gauging their whole 
worth by their place in an ordinal ranking use the idea that achieving their goals and 
finding the gnawing sense of worthlessness still there in their own gut as a kind of 



psychic bogey, something that they can use to justify stopping on their way down to 
dawn drills to smell flowers along the E.T.A. paths. The idea that achievement doesn't 
automatically confer interior worth is, to them, still, at this age, an abstraction, rather 
like the prospect of their own death — 'Caius Is Mortal' and so on. Deep down, they all 
still view the competitive carrot as the grail. They're mostly going through the motions 
when they invoke anhedonia. They're mostly small children, keep in mind. Listen to any 
sort of sub-16 exchange you hear in the bathroom or food line: 'Hey there, how are 
you?' 'Number eight this week, is how I am.' They all still worship the carrot. With the 
possible exception of the tormented LaMont Chu, they all still subscribe to the delusive 
idea that the continent's second-ranked fourteen-year-old feels exactly twice as 
worthwhile as the continent's #4. 

Deluded or not, it's still a lucky way to live. Even though it's temporary. It may well be 
that the lower-ranked little kids at E.T.A. are proportionally happier than the higher- 
ranked kids, since we (who are mostly not small children) know it's more invigorating to 
want than to have, it seems. Though maybe this is just the inverse of the same delusion. 
Hal Incandenza, though he has no idea yet of why his father really put his head in a 
speciaIly-dickied microwave in the Year of the Trial-Size Dove Bar, is pretty sure that it 
wasn't because of standard U.S. anhedonia. Hal himself hasn't had a bona fide intensity- 
of-interior-life-type emotion since he was tiny; he finds terms like joie and value to be 
like so many variables in rarified equations, and he can manipulate them well enough to 
satisfy everyone but himself that he's in there, inside his own hull, as a human being — 
but in fact he's far more robotic than John Wayne. One of his troubles with his Moms is 
the fact that Avril Incandenza believes she knows him inside and out as a human being, 
and an internally worthy one at that, when in fact inside Hal there's pretty much nothing 
at all, he knows. His Moms Avril hears her own echoes inside him and thinks what she 
hears is him, and this makes Hal feel the one thing he feels to the limit, lately: he is 
lonely. 

It's of some interest that the lively arts of the millennial U.S.A. treat anhedonia and 
internal emptiness as hip and cool. It's maybe the vestiges of the Romantic glorification 
of Weltschmerz, which means world-weariness or hip ennui. Maybe it's the fact that 
most of the arts here are produced by world-weary and sophisticated older people and 
then consumed by younger people who not only consume art but study it for clues on 
how to be cool, hip — and keep in mind that, for kids and younger people, to be hip and 
cool is the same as to be admired and accepted and included and so Unalone. Forget so- 
called peer-pressure. It's more like peer-hunger. No? We enter a spiritual puberty where 
we snap to the fact that the great transcendent horror is loneliness, excluded 
encagement in the self. Once we've hit this age, we will now give or take anything, wear 
any mask, to fit, be part-of, not be Alone, we young. The U.S. arts are our guide to 
inclusion. A how-to. We are shown how to fashion masks of ennui and jaded irony at a 
young age where the face is fictile enough to assume the shape of whatever it wears. 
And then it's stuck there, the weary cynicism that saves us from gooey sentiment and 
unsophisticated naivete. Sentiment equals naivete on this continent (at least since the 
Reconfiguration). One of the things sophisticated viewers have always liked about J. 0. 
Incandenza's The American Century as Seen Through a Brick is its unsubtle thesis that 



naivete is the last true terrible sin in the theology of millennial America. And since sin is 
the sort of thing that can be talked about only figuratively, it's natural that Himself's 
dark little cartridge was mostly about a myth, viz. that queerly persistent U.S. myth that 
cynicism and naivete are mutually exclusive. Hal, who's empty but not dumb, theorizes 
privately that what passes for hip cynical transcendence of sentiment is really some kind 
of fear of being really human, since to be really human fat least as he conceptualizes it) 
is probably to be unavoidably sentimental and naive and goo-prone and generally 
pathetic, is to be in some basic interior way forever infantile, some sort of not-quite- 
right-looking infant dragging itself anaclitically around the map, with big wet eyes and 
froggy-soft skin, huge skull, gooey drool. One of the really American things about Hal, 
probably, is the way he despises what it is he's really lonely for: this hideous internal 
self, incontinent of sentiment and need, that pules and writhes just under the hip empty 
mask, anhedonia. 281 

The American Century as Seen Through a Brick's main and famous key-image is of a 
piano-string vibrating — a high D, it looks like — vibrating, and making a very sweet 
unadorned solo sound indeed, and then a little thumb comes into the frame, a blunt 
moist pale and yet dingy thumb, with disreputable stuff crusted in one of the nail- 
corners, small and unlined, clearly an infantile thumb, and as it touches the piano string 
the high sweet sound immediately dies. And the silence that follows is excruciating. 
Later in the film, after much mordant and didactic panoramic brick-following, we're back 
at the piano-string, and the thumb is removed, and the high sweet sound recommences, 
extremely pure and solo, and yet now somehow, as the volume increases, now with 
something rotten about it underneath, there's something sick-sweet and overripe and 
potentially putrid about the one clear high D as its volume increases and increases, the 
sound getting purer and louder and more dysphoric until after a surprisingly few 
seconds we find ourselves right in the middle of the pure undampered sound longing 
and even maybe praying for the return of the natal thumb, to shut it up. 

Hal isn't old enough yet to know that this is because numb emptiness isn't the worst 
kind of depression. That dead-eyed anhedonia is but a remora on the ventral flank of 
the true predator, the Great White Shark of pain. Authorities term this condition clinical 
depression or involutional depression or unipolar dysphoria. Instead of just an incapacity 
for feeling, a deadening of soul, the predator-grade depression Kate Gompert always 
feels as she Withdraws from secret marijuana is itself a feeling. It goes by many names 
— anguish, despair, torment, or q.v. Burton's melancholia or Yevtuschenko's more 
authoritative psychotic depression — but Kate Gompert, down in the trenches with the 
thing itself, knows it simply as It. 

It is a level of psychic pain wholly incompatible with human life as we know it. It is a 
sense of radical and thoroughgoing evil not just as a feature but as the essence of 
conscious existence. It is a sense of poisoning that pervades the self at the self's most 
elementary levels. It is a nausea of the cells and soul. It is an unnumb intuition in which 
the world is fully rich and animate and un-map-like and also thoroughly painful and 
malignant and antagonistic to the self, which depressed self It billows on and coagulates 
around and wraps in Its black folds and absorbs into Itself, so that an almost mystical 
unity is achieved with a world every constituent of which means painful harm to the 



self. Its emotional character, the feeling Gompert describes It as, is probably mostly 
indescribable except as a sort of double bind in which any/all of the alternatives we 
associate with human agency — sitting or standing, doing or resting, speaking or 
keeping silent, living or dying — are not just unpleasant but literally horrible. 

It is also lonely on a level that cannot be conveyed. There is no way Kate Gompert 
could ever even begin to make someone else understand what clinical depression feels 
like, not even another person who is herself clinically depressed, because a person in 
such a state is incapable of empathy with any other living thing. This anhedonic Inability 
To Identify is also an integral part of It. If a person in physical pain has a hard time 
attending to anything except that pain, 282 a clinically depressed person cannot even 
perceive any other person or thing as independent of the universal pain that is digesting 
her cell by cell. Everything is part of the problem, and there is no solution. It is a hell for 
one. 

The authoritative term psychotic depression makes Kate Gompert feel especially 
lonely. Specifically the psychotic part. Think of it this way. Two people are screaming in 
pain. One of them is being tortured with electric current. The other is not. The screamer 
who's being tortured with electric current is not psychotic: her screams are 
circumstantially appropriate. The screaming person who's not being tortured, however, 
is psychotic, since the outside parties making the diagnoses can see no electrodes or 
measurable amperage. One of the least pleasant things about being psychotically 
depressed on a ward full of psychotically depressed patients is coming to see that none 
of them is really psychotic, that their screams are entirely appropriate to certain 
circumstances part of whose special charm is that they are undetectable by any outside 
party. Thus the loneliness: it's a closed circuit: the current is both applied and received 
from within. 

The so-called 'psychotically depressed' person who tries to kill herself doesn't do so 
out of quote 'hopelessness' or any abstract conviction that life's assets and debits do not 
square. And surely not because death seems suddenly appealing. The person in whom 
Its invisible agony reaches a certain unendurable level will kill herself the same way a 
trapped person will eventually jump from the window of a burning high-rise. Make no 
mistake about people who leap from burning windows. Their terror of falling from a 
great height is still just as great as it would be for you or me standing speculatively at 
the same window just checking out the view; i.e. the fear of falling remains a constant. 
The variable here is the other terror, the fire's flames: when the flames get close 
enough, falling to death becomes the slightly less terrible of two terrors. It's not desiring 
the fall; it's terror of the flames. And yet nobody down on the sidewalk, looking up and 
yelling 'Don't!' and 'Hang on!', can understand the jump. Not really. You'd have to have 
personally been trapped and felt flames to really understand a terror way beyond 
falling. 

But and so the idea of a person in the grip of It being bound by a 'Suicide Contract' 
some well-meaning Substance-abuse halfway house makes her sign is simply absurd. 
Because such a contract will constrain such a person only until the exact psychic 
circumstances that made the contract necessary in the first place assert themselves, 
invisibly and indescribably. That the well-meaning halfway-house Staff does not 



understand Its overriding terror will only make the depressed resident feel more alone. 

One fellow psychotically depressed patient Kate Gompert came to know at Newton- 
Wellesley Hospital in Newton two years ago was a man in his fifties. He was a civil 
engineer whose hobby was model trains — like from Lionel Trains Inc., etc. — for which 
he erected incredibly intricate systems of switching and track that filled his basement 
recreation room. His wife brought photographs of the trains and networks of trellis and 
track into the locked ward, to help remind him. The man said he had been suffering 
from psychotic depression for seventeen straight years, and Kate Gompert had had no 
reason to disbelieve him. He was stocky and swart with thinning hair and hands that he 
held very still in his lap as he sat. Twenty years ago he had slipped on a patch of 3-ln-l- 
brand oil from his model-train tracks and bonked his head on the cement floor of his 
basement rec room in Wellesley Hills, and when he woke up in the E.R. he was 
depressed beyond all human endurance, and stayed that way. He'd never once tried 
suicide, though he confessed that he yearned for unconsciousness without end. His wife 
was very devoted and loving. She went to Catholic Mass every day. She was very 
devout. The psychotically depressed man, too, went to daily Mass when he was not 
institutionalized. He prayed for relief. He still had his job and his hobby. He went to work 
regularly, taking medical leaves only when the invisible torment got too bad for him to 
trust himself, or when there was some radical new treatment the psychiatrists wanted 
him to try. They'd tried Tricyciics, M.A.O.I.s, insulin-comas, Selective-Serotonin- 
Reuptake Inhibitors, 283 the new and side-effect-laden Quadracyclics. They'd scanned his 
lobes and affective matrices for lesions and scars. Nothing worked. Not even high- 
amperage E.C.T. relieved It. This happens sometimes. Some cases of depression are 
beyond human aid. The man's case gave Kate Gompert the howling fantods. The idea of 
this man going to work and to Mass and building miniaturized railroad networks day 
after day after day while feeling anything like what Kate Gompert felt in that ward was 
simply beyond her ability to imagine. The rationo-spiritual part of her knew this man 
and his wife must be possessed of a courage way off any sort of known courage-chart. 
But in her toxified soul Kate Gompert felt only a paralyzing horror at the idea of the 
squat dead-eyed man laying toy track slowly and carefully in the silence of his wood- 
panelled rec room, the silence total except for the sounds of the track being oiled and 
snapped together and laid into place, the man's head full of poison and worms and 
every cell in his body screaming for relief from flames no one else could help with or 
even feel. 

The permanently psychotically depressed man was finally transferred to a place on 
Long Island to be evaluated for a radical new type of psychosurgery where they 
supposedly went in and yanked out your whole limbic system, which is the part of the 
brain that causes all sentiment and feeling. The man's fondest dream was anhedonia, 
complete psychic numbing. I.e. death in life. The prospect of radical psychosurgery was 
the dangled carrot that Kate guessed still gave the man's life enough meaning for him to 
hang onto the windowsill by his fingernails, which were probably black and gnarled from 
the flames. That and his wife: he seemed genuinely to love his wife, and she him. He 
went to bed every night at home holding her, weeping for it to be over, while she 
prayed or did that devout thing with beads. 



The couple had gotten Kate Gompert's mother's address and had sent Kate an Xmas 
card the last two years, Mr. and Mrs. Ernest Feaster of Wellesley Hills MA, stating that 
she was in their prayers and wishing her all available joy. Kate Gompert doesn't know 
whether Mr. Ernest Feaster's limbic system got yanked out or not. Whether he achieved 
anhedonia. The Xmas cards had had excruciating little watercolor pictures of 
locomotives on them. She could barely stand to think about them, even at the best of 
times, which the present was not. 


14 NOVEMBER YEAR OF THE DEPEND ADULT 
UNDERGARMENT 


Ms. Ruth van Cleve's first day off new residents' three-day House Restriction. Allowed 
now to hit meetings outside Enfield if accompanied by some more senior resident the 
Staff judges safe. Ruth van Cleve in spike heels walking alongside a psychotically 
depressed Kate Gompert on Prospect just south of Inman Square, Cambridge, a little 
after 2200h., yammering nonstop. 

Ruth van Cleve is shaping up to be excruciating for Kate Gompert to be around. Ruth 
van Cleve hails from Braintree on the South Shore, is many kilos underweight, wears 
brass-colored lipstick, and has dry hair teased out in the big-hair fashion of decades 
past. Her face has the late-stage lce 284 -addict's concave long-jawed insectile look. Her 
hair is a dry tangled cloud, with tiny little eyes and bones and projecting beak 
underneath. Joelle v.D.'d said it almost looked like Ruth van Cleve's hair grew her head 
instead of the other way around. Kate Gompert's hair is butcher-block cut and has 
recognizable color, at least. 

Kate Gompert hasn't slept in four nights, and her slumped progress up the Prospect 
sidewalk resembles the lazy tack of a boat in no rush. Ruth van Cleve talks nonstop into 
her right ear. It's around 2200h. on Saturday and the sodium streetlights keep going off 
and then on again with a stuttered hum, some connection in them loose somewhere. 
Foot-traffic is dense, and the undead and drunks who live in the streets around Inman 
Square also crowd the sidewalk's edges, and if Kate G. looks at the images of passersby 
in the darkened shop windows they become (pedestrians and undead stem-artists) just 
heads that seem to float across each window unconnected to anything. As in 
disconnected floating heads. In doorways by shops are incomplete persons in 
wheelchairs with creative receptacles where limbs should be and hand-lettered 
invitations to help them. 



An oral narrative begins to emerge. Ms. Ruth v.C. has been remanded to Ennet House 
by D.S.S. and Family Court after her newborn baby was discovered in a Braintree MA 
alley swaddled in WalMart advertising circulars whose Harvest Moon Value Specials had 
expired 11/01, a Sunday. Ruth van Cleve had rather unshrewdly left the hospital I.D. 
bracelet with its D.O.B. and her own name and Health Card # on the discarded infant's 
wrist. The infant is apparently now in a South Shore hospital incubator, attached to 
machines and tapering off the Clonidine 285 it received for in-utero addictions to 
substances Kate Gompert can only speculate about. 286 The father of Ruth van Cleve's 
child, she reports, is under the protection and care of the Norfolk County Correctional 
Authority, awaiting sentencing for what Ruth van Cleve describes several times as 
operating a pharmaceutical company without a license. 

What's remarkable to Kate Gompert is that she seems to be able to move forward 
without any sort of conscious moving-forward-type volitions. She puts her left foot in 
front of her right foot and then her right foot in front of her left foot, and she's moving 
forward, her whole self, when all she's capable of concentrating on is one foot and then 
the other foot. Heads glide by in the darkened windows. Some of the Latino males in the 
vicinity do a kind of sexual checking-out as they pass — even though underweight and 
dry-haired and kind of haggish, Ruth van Cleve's manner and attire and big hair 
broadcast that she's all about sexuality and sex. 

A negative thing about opting for recovery in NA instead of AA is availability and 
location of meetings. In other words fewer NA meetings. On a Saturday night you could 
stand on the roof of Ennet House in Enfield and be hard-pressed to spit in any direction 
without hitting some AA venue nearby. Whereas the closest Saturday-P.M. NA meeting 
is N. Cambridge's Clean and Serene Group, infamous for cross-talk and chair-throwing, 
and the thing's Beginner's Mtng. goes from 2000 to 2100h. and the regular from 2100 to 
2200h., purposely late, to offset the Saturday-night jones so many drug addicts suffer 
weekly, Saturday still being the week's special mythic Party-Night even for persons who 
long ago ceased to be able to do anything but Party 24 / 7 / 365 . But from Inman Square 
back to Ennet House is a ghastly hike — hoof up Prospect to Central Sq. and take the 
Red Line all the way to Park Street station and then the maddening Green Line B Train 
forever west on Comm. Ave. — and it's now after 22l5h., meaning Kate Gompert has 75 
minutes to get herself and this hideous, despair-producing, slutty and yammering 
newcomer beside her back for Curfew. Ruth van Cleve's chatter is as listener-interest- 
independent as anything Kate Gompert's heard since Randy Lenz got invited to ingest 
Substances and abuse animals elsewhere, and left, which was who knows how many 
days or weeks ago. 

The two move in and out of cones of epileptic light from fluttering street-lamps. Kate 
Gompert is trying not to shudder as Ruth van Cleve asks her if she knows someplace you 
can pick up a good toothbrush cheap. Kate Gompert's entire spiritual energy and 
attention are focused on first her left foot and then her right foot. One of the heads she 
does not see, floating in the windows with her own unrecognizable head and Ruth van 
Cleve's cloud of hair, is the gaunt and spectral hollow-eyed head of Poor Tony Krause, 
who's several steps behind them and matching their slightly serpentine course step for 
step, eyeing string purses he imagines contain more than just train-fare and NA 



Newcomers' keychains. 


The vaporizer chugs and seethes and makes the room's windows weep as Jim 
Troeltsch inserts a pro-wrestling cartridge in the little TP's viewer and dons his tackiest 
sportcoat and wet-combs his hair down smooth so it looks toupeeish and settles back 
on his bunk, surrounded by Seldane-bottles and two-ply facial tissue, preparing to call 
the action. His roommates have long since seen what was coming, and screwed. 

Standing on tiptoe in Subdorm B's curved hallway, using the handle of an inverted 
tennis racquet whose vinyl cover he can absently zip and unzip as he moves the handle 
around, Michael Pemulis is gently raising one of the panels in the drop-ceiling and 
shifting it on its aluminum strut, the panel, changing its lie on the strut from square¬ 
shaped to diamond-shaped, being careful not to let it fall. 

Lyle hovers cross-legged just a couple mm. above the top of the towel dispenser in the 
unlit weight room, eyes rolled up white, lips barely moving and making no sound. 

Coach Schtitt and Mario tear-ass downhill on W. Commonwealth on Schtitt's old 
BMW, bound for Evangeline's Low-Temperature Confections in Newton Center, right at 
the bottom of what usually gets called Heartbreak Hill, Schtitt intense-faced and leaning 
forward like a skier, his white scarf whipping around and whipping Mario's face, in the 
sidecar, as Mario too leans way forward into their downhill flight, preparing to whoop 
when they bottom out. 

Ms. Avril Incandenza, seeming somehow to have three or four cigarettes all going at 
once, secures from Information the phone and e-mail #s of a journalistic business 
address on East Tucson AZ's Blasted Expanse Blvd., then begins to dial, using the stern of 
a blue felt pen to stab at the console's keys. 


'AIYEE!' cries the man, rushing at the nun, wielding a power tool. 

The tough-looking nun yells 'AIYEE!' right back as she kicks at him expertly, her habit's 
skirts whipping complexly around her. The combatants circle each other warily in the 
abandoned warehouse, both growling. The nun's wimple is askew and soiled; the back 
of her hand, held out in a bladish martial-art fist, displays part of a faded tattoo, some 
wicked-clawed bird of prey. The cartridge opens like this, in violent medias res, then 
freezes in the middle of the nun's leaping kick, and its title. Blood Sister: One Tough Nun, 
gets matte-dissolved in and bleeds lurid blood-colored light down into the performance 
credits rolling across the screen's bottom. Bridget Boone and Frances L. Unwin have 
come in uninvited and joined Hal in V.R. 6 and are curled up against the arms of the 
room's other recumbency, their feet touching at the soles, Boone eating unauthorized 
frozen yogurt from a cylindrical carton. Hal's turned the rheostat down low, and the 
film's title and credits make their faces glow redly. Bridget Boone extends the 
confection-carton over in Hal's direction in an inviting way, and by way of declining Hal 
points to the lump of Kodiak in his cheek and makes a display of leaning out to spit. He 
appears to be studying the scrolling credits very closely. 

'So what is this?' Fran Unwin says. 



Hal looks over at her very slowly, then even more slowly raises his right arm and 
points around the tennis ball he's squeezing at the monitor, where the cartridge's 50- 
point title is still trickling redly over the credits and frozen scene. 

Bridget Boone gives him a look. 'What's up your particular butt?' 

'I'm isolating. I came in here to be by myself.' 

She has this way that gets to Hal of digging the chocolate yogurt out with the spoon 
and then inverting the spoon, turning the spoon over, so that it always enters her mouth 
upside-down and her tongue gets to contact the confection immediately, without the 
mediation of cold spoon, and for some reason this has always gotten under Hal's skin. 

'So then you should've locked the door.' 

'Except there aren't locks on the V.R. doors, 287 as you quite well know.' 

Round-faced Frannie Unwin says 'Sshhh.' 

Then too sometimes Boone plays with the laden spoon, makes it fly around in front of 
her face like a child's plane before inverting it and sticking it in. 'Maybe this is partly 
because this is a public room, for everybody, that your thinking person probably 
wouldn't choose to isolate in.' 

Hal leans over to spit and lets the spit hang for a while before he lets it go, so it hangs 
there slowly distending. 

Boone withdraws the clean spoon just as slowly. 'No matter how sullen and pouty that 
person is over that person's play or near-loss in full view of a whole crowd that day, I 
hear.' 

'Bridget, I forgot to tell you I saw that Rite Aid's having an enormous clearance on 
emetics. If I were you I'd scoot right over.' 

'You are vile.' 

Bernadette Longley sticks her long boxy head in the door and sees Bridget Boone and 
says 'I thought I heard you in here' and comes in uninvited with Jennie Bash in tow. 

Hal whimpers. 

Jennie Bash looks at the large screen. The cartridge's theme-music is female-choral 
and very heavy and ironic on the descants. Bernadette Longley looks at Hal. 'You know 
there's a totally huge lady cruising the halls looking for you, with a notebook and a very 
determined expression.' 

Boone banks the spoon back and forth absently. 'He's isolating. He won't respond and 
is spitting extra repulsively to get across the point.' 

Jennie Bash says 'Haven't you got a huge paper due for Thierry tomorrow? There was 
moaning coming from Struck and Shaw's room.' 

Hal packs chew down with his tongue. 'Done.' 

'Figures,' Bridget Boone says. 

'Done, redone, formatted, printed, proofed, collated, stapled.' 

'Proofed to within its life,' Boone says, barrel-rolling the spoon. Hal can tell she's done 
a couple one-hitters. He's looking straight at the wall's screen, squeezing the ball so hard 
his forearm keeps swelling to twice its size. 

'Plus I hear your best friend in the whole world did something really funny today,' 
Longley says. 

'She means Pemulis,' Fran Unwin tells Hal. 



Bridget Boone makes dive-bomber sounds and swoops the spoon around. 

'Sounds like too good a story not to save and let my craving for it build and build until 
finally it's like I have to hear it or die right on the spot.' 

'What is up his butt?' Jennie Bash asks Fran Unwin. Fran Unwin's a sort of hanuman- 
faced girl with a torso and trunk about twice as long as her legs, and a scuttly, vaguely 
simian style of play. Bernadette Longley wears knee-length candy-cane trousers and a 
sweatshirt with the fleecy inside out. All the girls are now in socks. Hal notes that girls 
always seem to slip out of their shoes when they assume any kind of spectatorial 
posture. Eight empty white sneakers now sit mute and weird at various points, slightly 
sunk in carpet pile. No two of the shoes face quite the same exact direction. Male 
players, on the other hand, tend to leave the footwear on when they come in and sit 
down somewhere. Girls literally embody the idea of making yourself at home. Males, 
when they come in somewhere and sit down, project an air of transience. Remain suited 
up and mobile. It's the same whenever Hal comes in and sits down someplace where 
people are already gathered. He's aware that they sense he's somehow there only in a 
very technical sense, that he's got an air of moment's-notice readiness to leave about 
him. Boone extends her carton of TCBY 288 toward Longley in an inviting way, even tilting 
it invitingly back and forth. Longley puffs her cheeks and blows air out with a fatigued 
sound. At least three different smells of cologne and skin-cream struggle for primacy in 
here. Bridget Boone's free LA Gear shoes are both on their sides from the force of 
having been almost kicked off her feet. Hal's spit makes a sound against the bottom of 
the wastebasket. Jennie Bash has bigger arms than Hal. The Viewing Room is redly dim. 
Bash asks Unwin what they're watching. 

Blood Sister: One Tough Nun, one of Himself's few commercial successes, wouldn't 
have made near the money it made if it hadn't come out just as InterLace was starting 
to purchase first-run features for its rental menus and hyping the cartridges with one¬ 
time Spontaneous Disseminations. It was the sort of sleazy-looking shocksploitation film 
that would have had a two-week run in multiplex theaters 8 and above and then gone 
right to the featureless brown boxes of magnetic-video limbo. Hal's critical take on the 
film is that Himself, at certain dark points when abstract theory-issues seemed to 
provide an escape from the far more wrenching creative work of making humanly true 
or entertaining cartridges, had made films in certain commercial-type genre modes that 
so grotesquely exaggerated the formulaic schticks of the genres that they became ironic 
metacinematic parodies on the genres: 'sub/inversions of the genres,' cognoscenti taken 
in were wont to call them. The metacinematic-parody idea itself was aloof and over- 
clever, to Hal's way of thinking, and he's not comfortable with the way Himself always 
seemed to get seduced by the very commercial formulae he was trying to invert, 
especially the seductive formulae of violent payback, i.e. the cathartic bloodbath, i.e. 
the hero trying with every will-fiber to eschew the generic world of the stick and fist and 
but driven by unjust circumstance back to the violence again, to the cathartic final 
bloodbath the audience is brought to applaud instead of mourn. Himself's best in this 
vein was The Night Wears a Sombrero, a Langesque metaWestern but also a really good 
Western, with chintzy homemade interior sets but breathtaking exteriors shot outside 
Tucson AZ, an ambivalent-but-finaliy-avenging-son story played out against dust-colored 



skies and big angles of flesh-colored mountain, plus with minimal splatter, shot men 
clutching their chests and falling deliciously sideways, all hats staying on at all times. 
Blood Sister: One Tough Nun was a supposedly ironic lampoon of the avenging-cleric 
splatter-films of the late B.S. '90s. Nor did Himself make any friends on either side of the 
Concavity, trying to shoot the thing in Canada. 

Hal tries to imagine the tall slumped tremulous stork-shape of Himself inclined at an 
osteoporotic angle over digital editing equipment for hours on end, deleting and 
inserting code, arranging Blood Sister: One Tough Nun into subversive/inversion, and 
can't summon one shadowy idea of what Himself might have been feeling as he 
patiently labored. Maybe that was the point of the thing's metasilliness, to have nothing 
really felt going on. 289 

Jennie Bash has left V.R. 6's door agape, and Idris Arslanian and Todd ('Postal Weight') 
Possalthwaite and Kent Blott all drift in and sit Indian-style in a loose hemisphere on the 
thick carpet between the girls' recumbency and Hal's recumbency, and are more or less 
considerately quiet. They all keep their sneakers on. Postal Weight's nose is a massive 
proboscoid bandaged thing. Kent Blott wears a sportfisherman's cap with an extremely 
long bill. That queer faint smell of hot dogs that seems to follow Idris Arslanian around 
begins to insinuate itself into the room's colognes. He isn't wearing the rayon 
handkerchief as a blindfold but does have it tied around his neck; no one asks him about 
it. All the littler kids are consummate spectators and are sucked immediately into Blood 
Sister's unfolding narrative, and the older females seem to take some kind of psychic 
cue from the little boys and subside, too, and watch, until after a while Hal's the only 
person in the room who isn't 100% absorbed. 

The entertainment's uptake is that a tough biker-chick-type girl from the mean streets 
of Toronto is found O.D.'d, beaten up, molested, and robbed of her leather jacket 
outside the portcullis of a downtown convent and is rescued, nursed, befriended, 
spiritually guided, and converted — 'saved' is the weak entendre made much of in the 
first act's dialogue — by a tough-looking older nun who it turns out, she reveals (the 
tough older nun), had herself been hauled up out of a life of Harleys, narcotics-dealing 
and -addiction by an even tougher even older nun, a nun who had herself been saved by 
a tough ex-biker nun, and so on. The latest saved biker-chick becomes a tough and 
street-smart nun in the same urban order, and is known on the mean streets as Blood 
Sister, and wimple or not still rides her Hawg from parish to parish and still knows akido 
and is not to be fucked with, is the word on the streets. 

The motivational crux here being that almost this whole order of nuns is staffed by 
nuns who'd been saved from Toronto's mean, dead-end streets by other older tougher 
saved nuns. So, endless novenas later. Blood Sister eventually feels this transitive 
spiritual urge to go out and find a troubled adolescent female of her own, to 'save' and 
bring into the order, thereby discharging her soul's debt to the old tough nun who'd 
saved her. Through processes obscure (a Toronto troubled-but-savable-adolescent-girl- 
directory of some sort? Bridget Boone cuts wise). Blood Sister eventually takes on a 
burn-scarred, deeply troubled adolescent punker-type Toronto girl who is sullen and, 
yes, reasonably tough, but is also vulnerable and emotionally tormented (the girl's pink 
shiny burn-scarred face tends to writhe in misery whenever she thinks Blood Sister's not 



looking) by the terrible depredations she's endured as a result of her rapacious and 
unshakable addiction to crank cocaine, the kind you have to convert and cook up 
yourself, and with ether, which is highly combustible, and which people used before 
somebody found out baking soda and temperature-flux would do the same thing, which 
dates the film's B.S. time-period even more clearly than the tough tortured punk girl's 
violet stelliform coiffure. 290 

But so Blood Sister eventually gets the girl clean, by nurturing her through Withdrawal 
in a locked sacristy; and the girl becomes less sullen by degrees that almost have audible 
clicks to them — the girl stops trying to dicky the lock of the sacramental-wine cabinet, 
stops farting on purpose during matins and vespers, stops going up to the Trappists who 
hang around the convent and asking them for the time and other sly little things to try 
to make them slip up and speak aloud, etc. A couple times the girl's face writhes in 
emotional torment and vulnerability even when Blood Sister's looking. The girl gets a 
severe and somewhat lesbianic haircut, and her roots establish themselves as softly 
brown. Blood Sister, revealing biceps like nobody's business, beats the girl at arm¬ 
wrestling; they both laugh; they compare tattoos: this marks the start of a brutally 
drawn-out Getting-to-Know-and-Trust-You montage, a genre-convention, this montage 
involving Harley-rides at such speeds that the girl has to keep her hand on Blood Sister's 
head to keep B.S.'s wimple from flying off, and long conversational walks filmed at wide- 
angle, and protracted and basically unwinnable games of charades with the Trappists, 
plus some quick scenes of Blood Sister finding the girl's Marlboros and dildo-facsimile 
lighter in the wastebasket, of the girl doing chores unsullenly under B.S.'s grudgingly 
approving eye, of candle-lit scripture-study sessions with the girl's finger under each 
word she reads, of the girl carefully snipping the last bits of split violet ends from her 
soft brown hair, of the more senior tough nuns punching Blood Sister's shoulder 
approvingly as the girl's eyes start to get that impending-conversion gleam in them, 
then, finally, of Blood Sister and the girl habit-shopping, the girl's burned lantern jaw 
and hairless Promethean brow frozen in a sunlit montage-climax shot under a novitiate 
wimple's gull-wings — all accompanied by — no kidding — 'Getting to Know You,' which 
Hal imagines the Stork justified to himself as subversively saccharine. This all takes 
about half an hour. Bridget Boone, of the Indianapolis archdiocese, begins to declaim 
briefly on Blood Sister: One Tough Nun's ironic anti-Catholic subthesis — that the 
deformed addicted girl's 'salvation' here seemed simply the exchange of one will- 
obliterating 'habit' for another, substituting one sort of outlandish head-decoration for 
another — and gets pinched by Jennie Bash and shushed by just about everyone in the 
room but Hal, who could pass for asleep except for the brief lists to port over the 
wastebasket, to spit, and in fact is experiencing some of the radical loss of concentration 
that attends THC-Withdrawal and is thinking about another, even more familiar J. 0. 
Incandenza cartridge even while he watches this one with the other E.T.A.s. This other 
attention-object is the late Himself's so-called 'inversion' of the corporate-politics genre, 
Low-Temperature Civics, an executive-suite soap opera filled with power plays, position- 
jockeyings, timid adulteries, martinis, and malignantly pretty female executives in 
elegant tight-fitting dress-for-successwear who eat their paunched and muddled male 
counterparts for political lunch. Hal knows that L-TC wasn't an inversion or lampoon at 



all, but derived right from the dark B.S. ' 80 s period when Himself had changed careers 
from government service to private entreprenurism, when a sudden infusion of patent- 
receipts left him feeling post-carrot anhedonic and existentially unmoored, and Himself 
took an entire year off to drink Wild Turkey and watch broadcast-television tycoon- 
operas like Lorimar's Dynasty et al. in a remote spa off Canada's Northwest coast, where 
he supposedly met and bonded with Lyle, now of the E.T.A. weight room. 

What's intriguing but unknown to everyone in V.R. 6 is the way Boone's take on 
Himself's take on the substitution-of-one-crutch-for-another interpretation of 
substituting Catholic devotion for chemical dependence is very close to the way many 
not-yet-desperate-enough newcomers to Boston AA see Boston AA as just an exchange 
of slavish dependence on the bottle/pipe for slavish dependence on meetings and banal 
shibboleths and robotic piety, an 'Attitude of Platitude,' and use this idea that it's still 
slavish dependence as an excuse to stop trying Boston AA, and to go back to the original 
slavish Substance-dependence, until that dependence has finally beaten them into such 
a double-bound desperation that they finally come back in with their faces hanging off 
their skulls and beg to be told just what platitudes to shout, and how high to adjust their 
vacant grins. 

Some Substance-dependent persons, though, have already been so broken by the 
time they first Come In that they don't care about stuff like substitution or banality, 
they'll give their left nut to trade their original dependence in for robotic platitudes and 
pep-rally cheer. They're the ones with the gun to their head, the ones who stick and 
Hang. It remains to be determined whether Joelle van Dyne, whose first appearance in a 
James 0. Incandenza project occurred in this very Low-Temperature Civics , is one of 
these people who've come into AA/NA shattered enough to stick, but she's starting to 
I.D. more and more with the Commitment speakers she hears who did come in 
shattered enough to know it's get straight or die. A click and a half straight downhill 
from E.T.A., Joelle is hitting the Reality Is For People That Can't Handle Drugs Group, a 
meeting of the NA-splinter Cocaine Anonymous , 291 mostly because the meeting's in the 
St. Elizabeth's Hospital Grand Rounds Auditorium, just a couple floors down from where 
Don Gately, whom she just got done visiting and mopping the massive unconscious fore¬ 
head of, is lying in the Trauma Wing in a truly bad way. CA meetings have a long 
preamble and endless little Xeroxed formalities they read aloud at the start, is one 
reason Joelle avoids CA, but the opening stuff is done by the time she gets down and 
comes in and gets some burnt urn-bottom coffee and finds an available seat. The only 
empty seats are in the meeting's back row — 'Denial Aisle,' the back rows are usually 
called — and Joelle is surrounded by catexic newcomers crossing and uncrossing their 
legs every few seconds and sniffing compulsively and looking like they're wearing every¬ 
thing they own. Plus there's the row of standing men — there's a certain hard-faced 
type of male in Boston fellowships who refuses ever to sit for meetings — standing 
behind the back row, legs set wide and arms crossed and talking to each other out the 
sides of their mouths, and she can tell the standing men are looking at her bare knees 
over her shoulder, making little comments about the knees and the veil. She thinks with 
fearful sentiment 292 of Don Gately, a tube down his throat, torn by fever and guilt and 
shoulder-pain, offered Demerol by well-meaning but clueless M.D.s, in and out of 



delirium, torn, convinced that certain men with hats wished him ill, looking at his room's 
semi-private ceiling like it would eat him if he dropped his guard. The big blackboard up 
on the stage says the Reality Is For People That Can't Handle Drugs Group welcomes 
tonight's Commitment speakers, the Freeway Access Group from Mattapan, which is 
deep in the colored part of Boston where Cocaine Anonymous tends to be most heavily 
concentrated. The speaker just starting in at the podium when Joelle sits down is a tall 
yellowish colored man with a weightlifter's build and frightening eyes, sloe and a kind of 
tannin-brown. He's been in CA seven months, he says. He eschews the normal CA 
drugologue's macho war-stories and gets right to his Bottom, his jumping-off place. 
Joelle can tell he's trying to tell the truth and not just posturing and performing the way 
so many CAs seem like they do. His story's full of colored idioms and those annoying 
little colored hand-motions and gestures, but to Joelle it doesn't seem like she cares that 
much anymore. She can Identify. The truth has a kind of irresistible unconscious 
attraction at meetings, no matter what the color or fellowship. Even Denial Aisle and the 
standing men are absorbed by the colored man's story. The colored man says his thing is 
he'd had a wife and a little baby daughter at home in Mattapan's Perry Hill Projects, and 
another baby on the way. He'd managed to hang on to his menial riveter's-assistant job 
at Universal Bleacher right up the street from here in Enfield because his addiction to 
crank cocaine wasn't everyday; he smoked on your binge-type basis, mostly weekends. 
Hellacious, psychopathic, bank-account-emptying binges, though. Like getting strapped 
to a Raytheon missile and you don't stop till that missile stops, Jim. He says his wife had 
got temp work cleaning houses, but when she worked they had to put their little girl in a 
day-care that just about ate her day's pay. So his paycheck was like their total float, and 
his weekend binges with the glass pipe caused them no end of Financial Insecurity, 
which he mispronounces. Which brings him to his last binge, the Bottom, which, 
predictably, occurred on a payday. This check just had to go for groceries and rent. They 
were two months back, and there was not jack-shit in the house in the way of to eat. At 
a smoke-break at Universal Bleacher he'd made sure and bought just one single vial, for 
just a tensky, for a Sunday-night treat after a weekend of abstinence and groceries and 
quality time with his pregnant wife and little daughter. The wife and little daughter were 
to meet him after work right off the bus stop at Brighton Best Savings, right under the 
big clock, to 'help' him deposit the paycheck right then and there. He'd let his wife 
stipulate the meeting at the bank because he knew in a self-disgusted way even then 
that there was this hazard of paycheck-type incidents from binges he'd pulled in the 
past, and their Financial Insecurity was now whatever word's past the word deep shit, 
and he knew goddamn well he could not afford to fuck up this time. 

He says that's how he used to think of it to himself: fucking up. 

He didn't even make it to the bus after clocking out, he said. Two other Holmeses 293 in 
Riveting had three vials each, which vials they had, like, brandished at him, and he'd 
kicked in his one vial because two-and-a-third vials v. one thin-ass Sunday-night vial was 
only a fucking fool way out of touch with the whole seize-the-opportunity concept could 
pass that shit up. In short it was the familiar insanity of money in the pocket and no 
defense against the urge, and the thought of his woman holding his little girl in her little 
knit cap and mittens standing under the big clock in cold March dusk didn't so much get 



pushed aside as somehow shrink to a tiny locket-size picture in the center of a part of 
him he and the Holmeses had set out busily to kill, with the pipe. 

He says he never made the bus. They passed a bottle of rye around the old Ford 
Mystique one of the Holmeses profiled, and fired up, right in the car, and after he once 
fired up with $ in his pocket the fat woman with the little helmet with horns on it done 
already like fucking sang, Jim. 294 

The man's hands grip the sides of the podium and he rests his weight on his elbow- 
locked arms in a way that conveys both abjection and pluck. He invites the CAs to let's 
just draw the curtain of charity over the rest of the night's scene, which after the check¬ 
cashing stop got hazy with missile-exhaust anyhow; but so he finally did get home to 
Mattapan the next morning, Saturday morning, sick and green-yellow and on that mean 
post-crank slide, dying for more and willing to kill for more and yet so mortified and 
ashamed of having done fucked up (again) that just going up the elevator to their 
apartment was maybe the bravest thing he'd ever done, up to that point, he felt. 