Aton 77, director of Saro University, thrust out a belligerent lower
lip and glared at the young newspaperman in a hot fury.
 Theremon 762 took that fury in his stride. In his earlier days, when
his now widely syndicated column was only a mad idea in a cub reporter's
mind, he had specialized in 'impossible' interviews. It had cost him
bruises, black eyes, and broken bones; but it had given him an ample supply
of coolness and self-confidence. So he lowered the outthrust hand that had
been so pointedly ignored and calmly waited for the aged director to get
over the worst. Astronomers were queer ducks, anyway, and if Aton's actions
of the last two months meant anything; this same Aton was the queer-duckiest
of the lot.
 Aton 77 found his voice, and though it trembled with restrained
emotion, the careful, somewhat pedantic phraseology, for which the famous
astronomer was noted, did not abandon him.
 'Sir,' he said, 'you display an infernal gall in coming to me with that
impudent proposition of yours.' The husky telephotographer of the
Observatory, Beenay 25, thrust a tongue's tip across dry lips and interposed
nervously, 'Now, sir, after all -- '
 The director turned to him and lifted a white eyebrow.
 'Do not interfere, Beenay. I will credit you with good intentions in
bringing this man here; but I will tolerate no insubordination now.'
 Theremon decided it was time to take a part. 'Director Aton, if you'll
let me finish what I started saying, I think -- '
 'I don't believe, young man,' retorted Aton, 'that anything you could
say now would count much as compared with your daily columns of these last
two months. You have led a vast newspaper campaign against the efforts of
myself and my colleagues to organize the world against the menace which it
is now too late to avert. You have done your best with your highly personal
attacks to make the staff of this Observatory objects of ridicule.'
 The director lifted a copy of the Saro City Chronicle from the table
and shook it at Theremon furiously. 'Even a person of your well-known
impudence should have hesitated before coming to me with a request that he
be allowed to cover today's events for his paper. Of all newsmen, you!'
 Aton dashed the newspaper to the floor, strode to the window, and
clasped his arms behind his back.
 'You may leave,' he snapped over his shoulder. He stared moodily out at
the skyline where Gamma, the brightest of the planet's six suns, was
setting. It had already faded and yellowed into the horizon mists, and Aton
knew he would never see it again as a sane man. He whirled. 'No, wait, come
here!' He gestured peremptorily. I'll give you your story.'
 The newsman had made no motion to leave, and now he approached the old
man slowly. Aton gestured outward.
 'Of the six suns, only Beta is left in the sky. Do you see it?'
 The question was rather unnecessary. Beta was almost at zenith, its
ruddy light flooding the landscape to an unusual orange as the brilliant
rays of setting Gamma died. Beta was at aphelion. It was small; smaller than
Theremon had ever seen it before, and for the moment it was undisputed ruler
of Lagash's sky.
 Lagash's own sun. Alpha, the one about which it revolved, was at the
antipodes, as were the two distant companion pairs. The red dwarf Beta --
Alpha's immediate companion -- was alone, grimly alone.
 Aton's upturned face flushed redly in the sunlight. 'In just under four
hours,' he said, 'civilization, as we know it, comes to an end. It will do
so because, as you see. Beta is the only sun in the sky.' He smiled grimly.
'Print that! There'll be no one to read it.'
 'But if it turns out that four hours pass -- and another four -- and
nothing happens?' asked Theremon softly.
 'Don't let that worry you. Enough will happen.'
 'Granted! And still -- it nothing happens?'
 For a second time, Beenay 25 spoke. 'Sir, I think you ought to listen
to him.'
 Theremon said, 'Put it to a vote, Director Aton.'
 There was a stir among the remaining five members of the Observatory
staff, who till now had maintained an attitude of wary neutrality.
 'That,' stated Aton flatly, 'is not necessary.' He drew out his pocket
watch. 'Since your good friend, Beenay, insists so urgently, I will give you
five minutes. Talk away.'
 'Good! Now, just what difference would it make if you allowed me to
take down an eyewitness account of what's to come? If your prediction comes
true, my presence won't hurt; for in that case my column would never be
written. On the other hand, if nothing comes of it, you will just have to
expect ridicule or worse. It would be wise to leave that ridicule to
friendly hands.'
 Aton snorted. 'Do you mean yours when you speak of friendly hands?'
 'Certainly!' Theremon sat down and crossed his legs.
 'My columns may have been a little rough, but I gave you people the
benefit of the doubt every time. After all. this is not the century to
preach "The end of the world is at hand" to Lagash. You have to understand
that people don't believe the Book of Revelations anymore, and it annoys
them to have scientists turn aboutface and tell us the Cultists are right
after all -- '
 'No such thing, young man,' interrupted Aton. 'While a great deal of
our data has been supplied us by the Cult, our results contain none of the
Cult's mysticism. Facts are facts, and the Cult's so-called mythology has
certain facts behind it. We've exposed them and ripped away their mystery. I
assure you that the Cult hates us now worse than you do.'
 'I don't hate you. I'm just trying to tell you that the public is in an
ugly humor. They're angry.'
 Aton twisted his mouth in derision. 'Let them be angry.'
 'Yes, but what about tomorrow?'
 'There'll be no tomorrow!'
 'But if there is. Say that there is -- just to see what happens. That
anger might take shape into something serious. After all, you know, business
has taken a nosedive these last two months. Investors don't really believe
the world is coming to an end, but just the same they're being cagy with
their money until it's all over. Johnny Public doesn't believe you, either,
but the new spring furniture might just as well wait a few months -- just to
make sure.
 'You see the point. Just as soon as this is all over, the business
interests will be after your hide. They'll say that if crackpots -- begging
your pardon -- can upset the country's prosperity any time they want, simply
by making some cockeyed prediction -- it's up to the planet to prevent them.
The sparks will fly, sir.'
 The director regarded the columnist sternly. 'And just what were you
proposing to do to help the situation?'
 'Well' -- Theremon grinned -- 'I was proposing to take charge of the
publicity. I can handle things so that only the ridiculous side will show.
It would be hard to stand, I admit, because I'd have to make you all out to
be a bunch of gibbering idiots, but if I can get people laughing at you,
they might forget to be angry. In return for that, all my publisher asks is
an exclusive story.'
 Beenay nodded and burst out, 'Sir, the rest of us think he's right.
These last two months we've considered everything but the million-to-one
chance that there is an error somewhere in our theory or in our
calculations. We ought to take care of that, too.'
 There was a murmur of agreement from the men grouped about the table,
and Aton's expression became that of one who found his mouth full of
something bitter and couldn't get rid of it.
 'You may stay if you wish, then. You will kindly refrain, however, from
hampering us in our duties in any way. You will also remember that I am in
charge of all activities here, and in spite of your opinions as expressed in
your columns, I will expect full cooperation and full respect -- '
 His hands were behind his back, and his wrinkled face thrust forward
determinedly as he spoke. He might have continued indefinitely but for the
intrusion of a new voice.
 'Hello, hello, hello!' It came in a high tenor, and the plump cheeks of
the newcomer expanded in a pleased smile. 'What's this morgue-like
atmosphere about here? No one's losing his nerve, I hope.'
 Aton started in consternation and said peevishly, 'Now what the devil
are you doing here, Sheerin? I thought you were going to stay behind in the
Hideout.'
 Sheerin laughed and dropped his stubby figure into a chair. 'Hideout be
blowed! The place bored me. I wanted to be here, where things are getting
hot. Don't you suppose I have my share of curiosity? I want to see these
Stars the Cultists are forever speaking about.' He rubbed his hands and
added in a soberer tone. 'It's freezing outside. The wind's enough to hang
icicles on your nose. Beta doesn't seem to give any heat at all, at the
distance it is.'
 The white-haired director ground his teeth in sudden exasperation. 'Why
do you go out of your way to do crazy things, Sheerin? What kind of good are
you around here?'
 'What kind of good am I around there?' Sheerin spread his palms in
comical resignation. 'A psychologist isn't worth his salt in the Hideout.
They need men of action and strong, healthy women that can breed children.
Me? I'm a hundred pounds too heavy for a man of action, and I wouldn't be a
success at breeding children. So why bother them with an extra mouth to
feed? I feel better over here.'
 Theremon spoke briskly. 'Just what is the Hideout, sir?'
 Sheerin seemed to see the columnist for the first time. He frowned and
blew his ample cheeks out. 'And just who in Lagash are you, redhead?'
 Aton compressed his lips and then muttered sullenly, 'That's Theremon
762, the newspaper fellow. I suppose you've heard of him.'
 The columnist offered his hand. 'And, of course, you're Sheerin 501 of
Saro University. I've heard of you.' Then he repeated, 'What is this
Hideout, sir?'
 'Well,' said Sheerin, 'we have managed to convince a few people of the
validity of our prophecy of -- er -- doom, to be spectacular about it, and
those few have taken proper measures. They consist mainly of the immediate
members of the families of the Observatory staff, certain of the faculty of
Saro University, and a few outsiders. Altogether, they number about three
hundred, but three quarters are women and children.'
 'I see! They're supposed to hide where the Darkness and the -- er --
Stars can't get at them, and then hold out when the rest of the world goes
poof.'
 'If they can. It won't be easy. With all of mankind insane, with the
great cities going up in flames -- environment will not be conducive to
survival. But they have food, water, shelter, and weapons -- '
 'They've got more,' said Aton. 'They've got all our records, except for
What we will collect today. Those records will mean everything to the next
cycle, and that's what must survive. The rest can go hang.'
 Theremon uttered a long, low whistle and sat brooding for several
minutes. The men about the table had brought out a multi-chess board and
started a six-member game. Moves were made rapidly and in silence. All eyes
bent in furious concentration on the board. Theremon watched them intently
and then rose and approached Aton, who sat apart in whispered conversation
with Sheerin.
 'Listen,' he said, let's go somewhere where we won't bother the rest of
the fellows. I want to ask some questions.'
 The aged astronomer frowned sourly at him, but Sheerin chirped up,
'Certainly. It will do me good to talk. It always does. Aton was telling me
about your ideas concerning world reaction to a failure of the prediction --
and I agree with you. I read your column pretty regularly, by the way, and
as a general thing I like your views.'
 'Please, Sheerin,' growled Aton.
 'Eh? Oh, all right. We'll go into the next room. It has softer chairs,
anyway.'
 There were softer chairs in the next room. There were also thick red
curtains on the windows and a maroon carpet on the floor. With the bricky
light of Beta pouring in, the general effect was one of dried blood.
 Theremon shuddered. 'Say, I'd give ten credits for a decent dose of
white light for just a second. I wish Gamma or Delta were in the sky.'
 'What are your questions?' asked Aton. 'Please remember that our time
is limited. In a little over an hour and a quarter we're going upstairs, and
after that there will be no time for talk.'
 'Well, here it is.' Theremon leaned back and folded his hands on his
chest. 'You people seem so all-fired serious about this that I'm beginning
to believe you. Would you mind explaining what it's all about?'
 Aton exploded, 'Do you mean to sit there and tell me that you've been
bombarding us with ridicule without even finding out what we've been trying
to say?'
 The columnist grinned sheepishly. 'It's not that bad, sir. I've got the
general idea. You say there is going to be a world-wide Darkness in a few
hours and that all mankind will go violently insane. What I want now is the
science behind it.'
 'No, you don't. No, you don't,' broke in Sheerin. 'If you ask Aton for
that -- supposing him to be in the mood to answer at all -- he'll trot out
pages of figures and volumes of graphs. You won't make head or tail of it.
Now if you were to ask me, I could give you the layman's standpoint.'
 'All right; I ask you.'
 'Then first I'd like a drink.' He rubbed his hands and looked at Aton.
 'Water?' grunted Aton.
 'Don't be silly!'
 'Don't you be silly. No alcohol today. It would be too easy to get my
men drunk. I can't afford to tempt them.'
 The psychologist grumbled wordlessly. He turned to Theremon, impaled
him with his sharp eyes, and began.
 'You realize, of course, that the history of civilization on Lagash
displays a cyclic character -- but I mean cyclic!'
 'I know,' replied Theremon cautiously, 'that that is the current
archaeological theory. Has it been accepted as a fact?'
 'Just about. In this last century it's been generally agreed upon. This
cyclic character is -- or rather, was -- one of the great mysteries. We've
located series of civilizations, nine of them definitely, and indications of
others as well, all of which have reached heights comparable to our own, and
all of which, without exception, were destroyed by fire at the very height
of their culture.
 'And no one could tell why. All centers of culture were thoroughly
gutted by fire, with nothing left behind to give a hint as to the cause.'
 Theremon was following closely. 'Wasn't there a Stone Age, too?'
 'Probably, but as yet practically nothing is known of it, except that
men of that age were little more than rather intelligent apes. We can forget
about that.'
 'I see. Go on!'
 There have been explanations of these recurrent catastrophes, all of a
more or less fantastic nature. Some say that there are periodic rains of
fire; some that Lagash passes through a sun every so often; some even wilder
things. But there is one theory, quite different from all of these, that has
been handed down over a period of centuries.'
 'I know. You mean this myth of the "Stars" that the Cultists have in
their Book of Revelations.'
 'Exactly,' rejoined Sheerin with satisfaction. 'The Cultists said that
every two thousand and fifty years Lagash entered a huge cave, so that all
the suns disappeared, and there came total darkness all over the world! And
then, they say, things called Stars appeared, which robbed men of their
souls and left them unreasoning brutes, so that they destroyed the
civilization they themselves had built up. Of course they mix all this up
with a lot of religio-mystic notions, but that's the central idea.'
 There was a short pause in which Sheerin drew a long breath. 'And now
we come to the Theory of Universal Gravitation.' He pronounced the phrase so
that the capital letters sounded -- and at that point Aton turned from the
window, snorted loudly, and stalked out of the room.
 The two stared after him, and Theremon said, 'What's wrong?'
 'Nothing in particular,' replied Sheerin. 'Two of the men were due
several hours ago and haven't shown up yet. He's terrifically short-handed,
of course, because all but the really essential men have gone to the
Hideout.'
 'You don't think the two deserted, do you?'
 'Who? Faro and Yimot? Of course not. Still, if they're not back within
the hour, things would be a little sticky.' He got to his feet suddenly, and
his eyes twinkled. 'Anyway, as long as Aton is gone -- '
 Tiptoeing to the nearest window, he squatted, and from the low window
box beneath withdrew a bottle of red liquid that gurgled suggestively when
he shook it.
 'I thought Aton didn't know about this,' he remarked as he trotted back
to the table. 'Here! We've only got one glass so, as the guest, you can have
it. I'll keep the bottle.'
 And he filled the tiny cup with judicious care. Theremon rose to
protest, but Sheerin eyed him sternly.
 'Respect your elders, young man.'
 The newsman seated himself with a look of anguish on his face. 'Go
ahead, then, you old villain.'
 The psychologist's Adam's apple wobbled as the bottle upended, and
then, with a satisfied grunt and a smack of the lips, he began again. 'But
what do you know about gravitation?'
 'Nothing, except that it is a very recent development, not too well
established, and that the math is so hard that only twelve men in Lagash are
supposed to understand it.'
 'Tcha! Nonsense! Baloney! I can give you all the essential math in a
sentence. The Law of Universal Gravitation states that there exists a
cohesive force among all bodies of the universe, such that the amount of
this force between any two given bodies is proportional to the product of
their masses divided by the square of the distance between them.'
 'Is that all?'
 'That's enough! It took four hundred years to develop it.'
 'Why that long? It sounded simple enough, the way you said it.'
 'Because great laws are not divined by flashes of inspiration, whatever
you may think. It usually takes the combined work of a world full of
scientists over a period of centuries. After Genovi 4I discovered that
Lagash rotated about the sun Alpha rather than vice versa -- and that was
four hundred years ago -- astronomers have been working. The complex motions
of the six suns were recorded and analyzed and unwoven. Theory after theory
was advanced and checked and counterchecked and modified and abandoned and
revived and converted to something else. It was a devil of a job.'
 Theremon nodded thoughtfully and held out his glass for more liquor.
Sheerin grudgingly allowed a few ruby drops to leave the bottle.
 'It was twenty years ago,' he continued after remoistening his own
throat, 'that it was finally demonstrated that the Law of Universal
Gravitation accounted exactly for the orbital motions of the six suns. It
was a great triumph.'
 Sheerin stood up and walked to the window, still clutching his bottle.
'And now we're getting to the point. In the last decade, the motions of
Lagash about Alpha were computed according to gravity, and if did not
account for the orbit observed; not even when all perturbations due to the
other suns were included. Either the law was invalid, or there was another,
as yet unknown, factor involved.'
 Theremon joined Sheerin at the window and gazed out past the wooded
slopes to where the spires of Saro City gleamed bloodily on the horizon. The
newsman felt the tension of uncertainty grow within him as he cast a short
glance at Beta. It glowered redly at zenith, dwarfed and evil.
 'Go ahead, sir,' he said softly.
 Sheerin replied, 'Astronomers stumbled about for year, each proposed
theory more untenable than the one before -- until Aton had the inspiration
of calling in the Cult. The head of the Cult, Sor 5, had access to certain
data that simplified the problem considerably. Aton set to work on a new
track.
 'What if there were another nonluminous planetary body such as Lagash?
If there were, you know, it would shine only by reflected light, and if it
were composed of bluish rock, as Lagash itself largely is, then, in the
redness of the sky, the eternal blaze of the suns would make it invisible --
drown it out completely.'
 Theremon whistled. 'What a screwy idea!'
 'You think that's screwy? Listen to this: Suppose this body rotated
about Lagash at such a distance and in such an orbit and had such a mass
that its attention would exactly account for the deviations of Lagash's
orbit from theory -- do you know what would happen?'
 The columnist shook his head.
 'Well, sometimes this body would get in the way of a sun.' And Sheerin
emptied what remained in the bottle at a draft.
 'And it does, I suppose,' said Theremon flatly.
 'Yes! But only one sun lies in its plane of revolution.' He jerked a
thumb at the shrunken sun above. 'Beta! And it has been shown that the
eclipse will occur only when the arrangement of the suns is such that Beta
is alone in its hemisphere and at maximum distance, at which time the moon
is invariably at minimum distance. The eclipse that results, with the moon
seven times the apparent diameter of Beta, covers all of Lagash and lasts
well over half a day, so that no spot on the planet escapes the effects.
That eclipse comes once every two thousand and forty-nine years.'
 Theremon's face was drawn into an expressionless mask.
 'And that's my story?'
 The psychologist nodded. 'That's all of it. First the eclipse -- which
will start in three quarters of an hour -- then universal Darkness and,
maybe, these mysterious Stars -- then madness, and end of the cycle.'
 He brooded. 'We had two months' leeway -- we at the Observatory -- and
that wasn't enough time to persuade Lagash of the danger. Two centuries
might not have been enough. But our records are at the Hideout, and today we
photograph the eclipse. The next cycle will start off with the truth, and
when the next eclipse comes, mankind will at last be ready for it. Come to
think of it, that's part of your story too.'
 A thin wind ruffled the curtains at the window as Theremon opened it
and leaned out. It played coldly with his hair as he stared at the crimson
sunlight on his hand. Then he turned in sudden rebellion.
 'What is there in Darkness to drive me mad?'
 Sheerin smiled to himself as he spun the empty liquor bottle with
abstracted motions of his hand. 'Have you ever experienced Darkness, young
man?'
 The newsman leaned against the wall and considered. 'No. Can't say I
have. But I know what it is. Just -- uh -- ' He made vague motions with his
fingers and then brightened. 'Just no light. Like in caves.' ,
 'Have you ever been in a cave?'
 'In a cave! Of course not!'
 'I thought not. I tried last week -- just to see -- but I got out in a
hurry. I went in until the mouth of the cave was just visible as a blur of
light, with black everywhere else. I never thought a person my weight could
run that fast.'
 Theremon's lip curled. 'Well, if it comes to that, I guess I wouldn't
have run if I had been there.'
 The psychologist studied the young man with an annoyed frown.
 'My, don't you talk big! I dare you to draw the curtain.'
 Theremon looked his surprise and said, 'What for? If we had four or
five suns out there, we might want to cut the light down a bit for comfort,
but now we haven't enough light as it is.'
 'That's the point. Just draw the curtain; then come here and sit down.'
 'All right.' Theremon reached for the tasseled string and jerked. The
red curtain slid across the wide window, the brass rings hissing their way
along the crossbar, and a dusk-red shadow clamped down on the room.
 Theremon's footsteps sounded hollowly in the silence as he made his way
to the table, and then they stopped halfway. 'I can't see you, sir,' he
whispered.
 'Feel your way,' ordered Sheerin in a strained voice.
 'But I can't see you, sir.' The newsman was breathing harshly. 'I can't
see anything.'
 'What did you expect?' came the grim reply. 'Come here and sit down!'
 The footsteps sounded again, waveringly, approaching slowly. There was
the sound of someone fumbling with a chair. Theremon's voice came thinly,
'Here I am. I feel . . . ulp . . . all right.'
 'You like it, do you?'
 'N -- no. It's pretty awful. The walls seem to be -- ' He paused. 'They
seem to be closing in on me. I keep wanting to push them away. But I'm not
going mad! In fact, the feeling isn't as bad as it was.'
 'All right. Draw the curtain back again.'
 There were cautious footsteps through the dark, the rustle of
Theremon's body against the curtain as he felt for the tassel, and then the
triumphant roo-osh of the curtain slithering back. Red light flooded the
room, and with a cry of joy Theremon looked up at the sun.
 Sheerin wiped the moistness off his forehead with the back of a hand
and said shakily, 'And that was just a dark room.'
 'It can be stood,' said Theremon lightly.
 'Yes, a dark room can. But were you at the Jonglor Centennial
Exposition two years ago?'
 'No, it so happens I never got around to it. Six thousand miles was
just a bit too much to travel, even for the exposition.'
 'Well, I was there. You remember hearing about the "Tunnel of Mystery"
that broke all records in the amusement area -- for the first month or so,
anyway?'
 'Yes. Wasn't there some fuss about it?'
 'Very little. It was hushed up. You see, that Tunnel of Mystery was
just a mile-long tunnel -- with no lights. You got into a little open car
and jolted along through Darkness for fifteen minutes. It was very popular
-- while it lasted.'
 'Popular?'
 'Certainly. There's a fascination in being frightened when it's part of
a game. A baby is born with three instinctive fears: of loud noises, of
falling, and of the absence of light. That's why it's considered so funny to
jump at someone and shout "Boo!" That's why it's such fun to ride a roller
coaster. And that's why that Tunnel of Mystery started cleaning up. People
came out of that Darkness shaking, breathless, half dead with fear, but they
kept on paying to get in.'
 'Wait a while, I remember now. Some people came out dead, didn't they?
There were rumors of that after it shut down.'
 The psychologist snorted. 'Bah! Two or three died. That was nothing!
They paid off the families of the dead ones and argued the Jonglor City
Council into forgetting it. After all, they said, if people with weak hearts
want to go through the tunnel, it was at their own risk -- and besides, it
wouldn't happen again. So they put a doctor in the front office and had
every customer go through a physical examination before getting into the
car. That actually boosted ticket sales.'
 'Well, then?'
 'But you see, there was something else. People sometimes came out in
perfect order, except that they refused to go into buildings -- any
buildings; including palaces, mansions, apartment houses, tenements,
cottages, huts, shacks, lean-tos, and tents.'
 Theremon looked shocked. 'You mean they refused to come in out of the
open? Where'd they sleep?'
 'In the open.'
 'They should have forced them inside.'
 'Oh, they did, they did. Whereupon these people went into violent
hysterics and did their best to bat their brains out against the nearest
wall. Once you got them inside, you couldn't keep them there without a
strait jacket or a heavy dose of tranquilizer.'
 'They must have been crazy.'
 'Which is exactly what they were. One person out of every ten who went
into that tunnel came out that way. They called in the psychologists, and we
did the only thing possible. We closed down the exhibit.' He spread his
hands.
 'What was the matter with these people?' asked Theremon finally.
 'Essentially the same thing that was the matter with you when you
thought the walls of the room were crushing in on you in the dark. There is
a psychological term for mankind's instinctive fear of the absence of light.
We call it "claustrophobia", because the lack of light is always tied up
with enclosed places, so that fear of one is fear of the other. You see?'
 'And those people of the tunnel?'
 'Those people of the tunnel consisted of those unfortunates whose
mentality did not quite possess the resiliency to overcome the
claustrophobia that overtook them in the Darkness. Fifteen minutes without
light is a long time; you only had two or three minutes, and I believe you
were fairly upset.
 'The people of the tunnel had what is called a "claustrophobic
fixation". Their latent fear of Darkness and enclosed places had crystalized
and become active, and, as far as we can tell, permanent. That's what
fifteen minutes in the dark will do.'
 There was a long silence, and Theremon's forehead wrinkled slowly into
a frown. 'I don't believe it's that bad.'
 'You mean you don't want to believe,' snapped Sheerin. 'You're afraid
to believe. Look out the window!'
 Theremon did so, and the psychologist continued without pausing.
'Imagine Darkness -- everywhere. No light, as far as you can see. The
houses, the trees, the fields, the earth, the sky -- black! And Stars thrown
in, for all I know -- whatever they are. Can you conceive it?'
 'Yes, I can,' declared Theremon truculently.
 And Sheerin slammed his fist down upon the table in sudden passion.
'You lie! You can't conceive that. Your brain wasn't built for the
conception any more than it was built for the conception of infinity or of
eternity. You can only talk about it. A fraction of the reality upsets you,
and when the real thing comes, your brain is going to be presented with the
phenomenon outside its limits of comprehension. You will go mad, completely
and permanently! There is no question of it!'
 He added sadly, 'And another couple of millennia of painful struggle
comes to nothing. Tomorrow there won't be a city standing unharmed in all
Lagash.'
 Theremon recovered part of his mental equilibrium. 'That doesn't
follow. I still don't see that I can go loony just because there isn't a sun
in the sky -- but even if I did, and everyone else did, how does that harm
the cities? Are we going to blow them down?'
 But Sheerin was angry, too. 'If you were in Darkness, what would you
want more than anything else; what would it be that every instinct would
call for? Light, damn you, light!'
 'Well?'
 'And how would you get light?'
 'I don't know,' said Theremon flatly.
 'What's the only way to get light, short of a sun?'
 'How should I know?'
 They were standing face to face and nose to nose.
 Sheerin said, 'You bum something, mister. Ever see a forest fire? Ever
go camping and cook a stew over a wood fire? Heat isn't the only thing
burning wood gives off, you know. It gives off light, and people know that.
And when it's dark they want light, and they're going to get it.'
 'So they bum wood?'
 'So they burn whatever they can get. They've got to have light. They've
got to burn something, and wood isn't handy -- so they'll burn whatever is
nearest. They'll have their light -- and every center of habitation goes up
in flames!'
 Eyes held each other as though the whole matter were a personal affair
of respective will powers, and then Theremon broke away wordlessly. His
breathing was harsh and ragged, and he scarcely noted the sudden hubbub that
came from the adjoining room behind the closed door.
 Sheerin spoke, and it was with an effort that he made it sound
matter-of-fact. 'I think I heard Yimot's voice. He and Faro are probably
back. Let's go in and see what kept them.'
 'Might as well!' muttered Theremon. He drew a long breath and seemed to
shake himself. The tension was broken.
The room was in an uproar, with members of the staff clustering about two
young men who were removing outer garments even as they parried the
miscellany of questions being thrown at them.
 Aton hustled through the crowd and faced the newcomers angrily. 'Do you
realize that it's less than half an hour before deadline? Where have you two
been?'
 Faro 24 seated himself and rubbed his hands. His cheeks were red with
the outdoor chill. 'Yimot and I have just finished carrying through a little
crazy experiment of our own. We've been trying to see if we couldn't
construct an arrangement by which we could simulate the appearance of
Darkness and Stars so as to get an advance notion as to how it looked.'
 There was a confused murmur from the listeners, and a sudden look of
interest entered Aton's eyes. 'There wasn't anything said of this before.
How did you go about it?'
 'Well,' said Faro, 'the idea came to Yimot and myself long ago, and
we've been working it out in our spare time. Yimot knew of a low one-story
house down in the city with a domed roof -- it had once been used as a
museum, I think. Anyway, we bought it -- '
 'Where did you get the money?' interrupted Aton peremptorily.
 'Our bank accounts,' grunted Yimot 70. 'It cost two thousand credits.'
Then, defensively, 'Well, what of it? Tomorrow, two thousand credits will be
two thousand pieces of paper. That's all.'
 'Sure.' agreed Faro. 'We bought the place and rigged it up with black
velvet from top to bottom so as to get as perfect a Darkness as possible.
Then we punched tiny holes in the ceiling and through the roof and covered
them with little metal caps, all of which could be shoved aside
simultaneously at the close of a switch. At least we didn't do that part
ourselves; we got a carpenter and an electrician and some others -- money
didn't count. The point was that we could get the light to shine through
those holes in the roof, so that we could get a starlike effect.'
 Not a breath was drawn during the pause that followed. Aton said
stiffly, 'You had no right to make a private -- '
 Faro seemed abashed. 'I know, sir -- but frankly, Yimot and I thought
the experiment was a little dangerous. If the effect really worked, we half
expected to go mad -- from what Sheerin says about all this, we thought that
would be rather likely. We wanted to take the risk ourselves. Of course if
we found we could retain sanity, it occurred to us that we might develop
immunity to the real thing, and then expose the rest of you the same way.
But things didn't work out at all -- '
 'Why, what happened?'
 It was Yimot who answered. 'We shut ourselves in and allowed our eyes
to get accustomed to the dark. It's an extremely creepy feeling because the
total Darkness makes you feel as if the walls and ceiling are crushing in on
you. But we got over that and pulled the switch. The caps fell away and the
roof glittered all over with little dots of light -- '
 'Well?'
 'Well -- nothing. That was the whacky part of it. Nothing happened. It
was just a roof with holes in it, and that's just what it looked like. We
tried it over and over again -- that's what kept us so late -- but there
just isn't any effect at all.'
 There followed a shocked silence, and all eyes turned to Sheerin, who
sat motionless, mouth open.
 Theremon was the first to speak. 'You know what this does to this whole
theory you've built up, Sheerin, don't you?' He was grinning with relief.
 But Sheerin raised his hand. 'Now wait a while. Just let me think this
through.' And then he snapped his fingers, and when he lifted his head there
was neither surprise nor uncertainty in his eyes. 'Of course -- '
 He never finished. From somewhere up above there sounded a sharp clang,
and Beenay, starting to his feet, dashed up the stairs with a 'What the
devil!'
 The rest followed after.
 Things happened quickly. Once up in the dome, Beenay cast one horrified
glance at the shattered photographic plates and at the man bending over
them; and then hurled himself fiercely at the intruder, getting a death grip
on his throat. There was a wild threshing, and as others of the staff joined
in, the stranger was swallowed up and smothered under the weight of half a
dozen angry men.
 Aton came up last, breathing heavily. 'Let him up!'
 There was a reluctant unscrambling and the stranger, panting harshly,
with his clothes torn and his forehead bruised, was hauled to his feet. He
had a short yellow beard curled elaborately in the style affected by the
Cultists. Beenay shifted his hold to a collar grip and shook the man
savagely. 'All right, rat, what's the idea? These plates -- '
 'I wasn't after them,' retorted the Cultist coldly. 'That was an
accident.'
 Beenay followed his glowering stare and snarled, 'I see. You were after
the cameras themselves. The accident with the plates was a stroke of luck
for you, then. If you had touched Snapping Bertha or any of the others, you
would have died by slow torture. As it is -- ' He drew his fist back.
 Aton grabbed his sleeve. 'Stop that! Let him go!'
 The young technician wavered, and his arm dropped reluctantly. Aton
pushed him aside and confronted the Cultist. 'You're Latimer, aren't you?'
 The Cultist bowed stiffly and indicated the symbol upon his hip. I am
Latimer 25, adjutant of the third class to his serenity, Sor 5.'
 'And' -- Aton's white eyebrows lifted -- 'you were with his serenity
when he visited me last week, weren't you?'
 Latimer bowed a second time.
 'Now, then, what do you want?'
 'Nothing that you would give me of your own free will.'
 'Sor 5 sent you, I suppose -- or is this your own idea?'
 'I won't answer that question.'
 'Will there be any further visitors?'
 'I won't answer that, either.'
 Aton glanced at his timepiece and scowled. 'Now, man, what is it your
master wants of me? I have fulfilled my end of the bargain.'
 Latimer smiled faintly, but said nothing.
 'I asked him,' continued Aton angrily, 'for data only the Cult could
supply, and it was given to me. For that, thank you. In return I promised to
prove the essential truth of the creed of the Cult.'
 'There was no need to prove that,' came the proud retort. It stands
proven by the Book of Revelations.'
 'For the handful that constitute the Cult, yes. Don't pretend to
mistake my meaning. I offered to present scientific backing for your
beliefs. And I did!'
 The Cultist's eyes narrowed bitterly. 'Yes, you did -- with a fox's
subtlety, for your pretended explanation backed our beliefs, and at the same
time removed all necessity for them. You made of the Darkness and of the
Stars a natural phenomenon and removed all its real significance. That was
blasphemy.'
 'If so, the fault isn't mine. The facts exist. What can I do but state
them?'
 'Your "facts" are a fraud and a delusion.'
 Aton stamped angrily. 'How do you know?'
 And the answer came with the certainty of absolute faith. 'I know!'
 The director purpled and Beenay whispered urgently. Aton waved him
silent. 'And what does Sor 5 want us to do? He still thinks. I suppose, that
in trying to warn the world to take measures against the menace of madness,
we are placing innumerable souls in jeopardy. We aren't succeeding, if that
means anything to him.'
 'The attempt itself has done harm enough, and your vicious effort to
gain information by means of your devilish instruments must be stopped. We
obey the will of the Stars, and I only regret that my clumsiness prevented
me from wrecking your infernal devices.'
 'It wouldn't have done you too much good,' returned Aton. 'All our
data, except for the direct evidence we intend collecting right now, is
already safely cached and well beyond possibility of harm.' He smiled
grimly. 'But that does not affect your present status as an attempted
burglar and criminal.'
 He turned to the men behind him. 'Someone call the police at Saro
City.'
 There was a cry of distaste from Sheerin. 'Damn it, Aton, what's wrong
with you? There's no time for that. Here' -- he hustled his way forward --
'let me handle this.'
 Aton stared down his nose at the psychologist. 'This is not the time
for your monkeyshines, Sheerin. Will you please let me handle this my own
way? Right now you are a complete outsider here, and don't forget it.'
 Sheerin's mouth twisted eloquently. 'Now why should we go to the
impossible trouble of calling the police -- with Beta's eclipse a matter of
minutes from now -- when this young man here is perfectly willing to pledge
his word of honor to remain and cause no trouble whatsoever?'
 The Cultist answered promptly, 'I will do no such thing. You're free to
do what you want, but it's only fair to warn you that just as soon as I get
my chance I'm going to finish what I came out here to do. If it's my word of
honor you're relying on, you'd better call the police.'
 Sheerin smiled in a friendly fashion. 'You're a determined cuss, aren't
you? Well, I'll explain something. Do you see that young man at the window?
He's a strong, husky fellow, quite handy with his fists, and he's an
outsider besides. Once the eclipse starts there will be nothing for him to
do except keep an eye on you. Besides him, there will be myself -- a little
too stout for active fisticuffs, but still able to help.'
 'Well, what of it?' demanded Latimer frozenly.
 'Listen and I'll tell you,' was the reply. 'Just as soon as the eclipse
starts, we're going to take you, Theremon and I, and deposit you in a little
closet with one door, to which is attached one giant lock and no windows.
You will remain there for the duration.'
 'And afterward,' breathed Latimer fiercely, 'there'll be no one to let
me out. I know as well as you do what the coming of the Stars means -- I
know it far better than you. With all your minds gone, you are not likely to
free me. Suffocation or slow starvation, is it? About what I might have
expected from a group of scientists. But I don't give my word. It's a matter
of principle, and I won't discuss it further.'
 Aton seemed perturbed. His faded eyes were troubled.
 'Really, Sheerin, locking him -- '
 'Please!' Sheerin motioned him impatiently to silence. 'I don't think
for a moment things will go that far. Latimer has just tried a clever little
bluff, but I'm not a psychologist just because I like the sound of the
word.' He grinned at the Cultist. 'Come now, you don't really think I'm
trying anything as crude as slow starvation. My dear Latimer, if I lock you
in the closet, you are not going to see the Darkness, and you are not going
to see the Stars. It does not take much knowledge of the fundamental creed
of the Cult to realize that for you to be hidden from the Stars when they
appear means the loss of your immortal soul. Now, I believe you to be an
honorable man. I'll accept your word of honor to make no further effort to
disrupt proceedings, if you'll offer it.'
 A vein throbbed in Latimer's temple, and he seemed to shrink within
himself as he said thickly, 'You have it!' And then he added with swift
fury. 'But it is my consolation that you will all be damned for your deeds
of today.' He turned on his heel and stalked to the high three-legged stool
by the door.
 Sheerin nodded to the columnist. 'Take a seat next to him, Theremon --
just as a formality. Hey, Theremon!'
 But the newspaperman didn't move. He had gone pale to the lips. 'Look
at that!' The finger he pointed toward the sky shook, and his voice was dry
and cracked.
 There was one simultaneous gasp as every eye followed the pointing
finger and, for one breathless moment, stared frozenly.
 Beta was chipped on one side!
 The tiny bit of encroaching blackness was perhaps the width of a
fingernail, but to the staring watchers it magnified itself into the crack
of doom.
 Only for a moment they watched, and after that there was a shrieking
confusion that was even shorter of duration and which gave way to an orderly
scurry of activity -- each man at his prescribed job. At the crucial moment
there was no time for emotion. The men were merely scientists with work to
do. Even Aton had melted away.
 Sheerin said prosaically. 'First contact must have been made fifteen
minutes ago. A little early, but pretty good considering the uncertainties
involved in the calculation.' He looked about him and then tiptoed to
Theremon, who still remained staring out the window, and dragged him away
gently.
 'Aton is furious,' he whispered, 'so stay away. He missed first contact
on account of this fuss with Latimer, and if you get in his way he'll have
you thrown out the window.'
 Theremon nodded shortly and sat down. Sheerin stared in surprise at
him.
 'The devil, man,' he exclaimed, 'you're shaking.'
 'Eh?' Theremon licked dry lips and then tried to smile. 'I don't feel
very well, and that's a fact.'
 The psychologist's eyes hardened. 'You're not losing your nerve?'
 'No!' cried Theremon in a flash of indignation. 'Give me a chance, will
you? I haven't really believed this rigmarole -- not way down beneath,
anyway -- till just this minute. Give me a chance to get used to the idea.
You've been preparing yourself for two months or more.'
 'You're right, at that,' replied Sheerin thoughtfully. 'Listen! Have
you got a family -- parents, wife, children?'
 Theremon shook his head. 'You mean the Hideout, I suppose. No, you
don't have to worry about that. I have a sister, but she's two thousand
miles away. I don't even know her exact address.'
 'Well, then, what about yourself? You've got time to get there, and
they're one short anyway, since I left. After all, you're not needed here,
and you'd make a darned fine addition -- '
 Theremon looked at the other wearily. 'You think I'm scared stiff,
don't you? Well, get this, mister. I'm a newspaperman and I've been assigned
to cover a story. I intend covering it.'
 There was a faint smile on the psychologist's face. 'I see.
Professional honor, is that it?'
 'You might call it that. But, man. I'd give my right arm for another
bottle of that sockeroo juice even half the size of the one you bogged. If
ever a fellow needed a drink, I do.'